# FAST-CHIMP
Facilitated Segmentation and Tracking of Chromosomes in Mitosis Pipeline

## Data arrangement
1. Please save separate timepoints as separate images in a folder, named "separate" and name them according to the time point, starting with t1000.tif. For example, t1112.tif and t1113.tif are two separate 3D stacks, adjacent in time.
2. Make sure the images are 30 - 40 micrometers across XY (ideal 25) and 20-25 micrometers in Z (ideal 21). If the dimensions are much bigger, please crop accordingly. If much smaller, you can pad with zeros, using Fiji's function "Adjust canvass size".
3. Adjust the size of the images, so that the pixel size in XY is close to 50 nm, and the pixel size in Z is close to 180 nm. These do not need to be exact but should be as close as possible. Size adjustment can be done in Fiji, using interpolation (Image --> Adjust --> Size).

## Denoising
4. Run the CARE denoising prediction using the provided model by running the scipt "CARE_denoising.py". The results will appear in a new folder named "restored".
#### Note: 
We recommend visual inspection of the denoising results at this point. It is possible that very different experimental conditions will make the provided denoising model inaccurate. In this case, you can train your own CARE model. Alternatively, you can try other denoising methods, such as N2N and N2V, or simply use the raw images, without denoising. In the latter case, just rename the folder "separate" to "restored" and proceed.

## Resizing and oversegmentation
5. Now the restored images will be resized to match the dimensions of the trained segmentation model. We also need to perform an oversegmentation, to help with the tracking step later. To perform both actions, run the script "overseg_and_resize.py":
   
   python overseg_and_resize.py 20 0.1
   
The two arguments are Watershed segmentation parameters - intensity threshold and tolerance. You can vary them and inspect the results in the folder "overseg" which the script will create. The default values should be OK. You should look for an oversegmentation where a chromosome is roughly split into 10 chunks.

## Segmentation
6. Apply the provided Embedseg model on the images in the "resized" folder. The model will place the segmentations in a folder "inference/prediction".

## Registration
Pairwise registration is necessary for propagating the segmentation labels over time. Two substeps are necessary: elastix registration and Voxelmorph registration.

#### Elastix registration
7. Create the registration batch file by running the script "affine_registration.py", giving it the first and last time points as arguments. For example:
   
   python affine_registration.py 1000 1200

8. Run the script register_pairs.bat, generated automatically by the previous step. It invokes separate elastix commands for each pair of images. The results will be automatically saved in a folder called "results_pairs". This step is the most time consuming, it can take a few hours depending on the machine, and if you have hundreds of images.

#### Voxelmorph registration
No action is necessary here, the Voxelmorph model will be used automatically at the next step - the tracking procedure.

## Arranging registration files
9. Run the script reorganize_affine_registrations.py, giving it the first and last time points as arguments. For example:
   
   python reorganizeaffine_registration.py 1000 1200

## Tracking
10. Run the script create_propagation_batch.py, giving it the first and last time points as arguments. For example:
   
   python create_propagation_batch.py 1000 1050

We recommend doing this step in batches, rather than using all time points. This will facilitate manual correction. After correcting the last time point, it can be used as a starting point for propagation of the next batch.
   
10. Run the batch file propagate_1000_1050.bat which will be automatically generated by the previous step (the numbers will match your input). 

## Visualize results and perform manual corrections

